Sending Emails from the Edge with Rust (#1953)
mainmatter/mainmatter.com: src/posts/2022-11-17-sending-emails-from-the-edge-with-rust.md

---
title: "Sending Emails from the Edge with Rust"
authorHandle: marcoow
tags: rust
bio: "Marco Otte-Witte"
description:
  "Marco Otte-Witte explains how to send emails via the Sendgrid API from a WASM
  edge function written in Rust."
og:
  image: /assets/images/posts/2022-10-12-making-a-strategic-bet-on-rust/og-image.jpg
tagline: |

>   <p>Edge computing has seen a big rise over the past few years. There's a bunch of providers that have edge function offering which typically is based on V8. As V8 support WASM, it's possible to run code written in Rust (and compiled to WASM) on those edge functions. When we were looking to move our old service that handled submissions of our [contact form](/contact/) off of AWS Lambda (which is famous for having high latency), writing it in Rust and running it on the edge seemed like an exciting option.</p>

Reviewer: looks like the `contact form` link is broken

Author: ouch – fixed 👍

>   <p>Edge computing has seen a big rise over the past few years. There's a bunch of providers that have edge function offering which typically is based on V8. As V8 support WASM, it's possible to run code written in Rust (and compiled to WASM) on those edge functions. When we were looking to move our old service that handled submissions of our <a href="/contact/">contact form</a> off of AWS Lambda (which is famous for having high latency), writing it in Rust and running it on the edge seemed like an exciting option.</p>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <p>Edge computing has seen a big rise over the past few years. There are a bunch of providers that have edge function offering which typically is based on V8. As V8 supports WASM, it's possible to run code written in Rust (and compiled to WASM) on those edge functions. When we were looking to move our old service that handled submissions of our <a href="/contact/">contact form</a> off of AWS Lambda (which is famous for having high latency), writing it in Rust and running it on the edge seemed like an exciting option.</p>
```

image: "/assets/images/posts/2022-10-12-making-a-strategic-bet-on-rust/mainmatter-loves-rust.png"
imageAlt: "TODO"
---

If you want to send emails, you'll typically use a third party service for that.

> There's many options that all have their pros and cons – we chose

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are many options that all have their pros and cons – we chose
```

[Sendgrid](http://sendgrid.com). Whatever service you end up choosing, they'll
provide some kind of HTTP API for sending emails. In the case of Sendgrid that
looks roughly like this:

```bash
curl --request POST \
  --url https://api.sendgrid.com/v3/mail/send \
  --header 'Authorization: Bearer <<YOUR_API_KEY>>' \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data '{"personalizations":[{"to":[{"email":"john.doe@example.com"}],"subject":"Hello, World!"}],"content": [{"type": "text/plain", "value": "Heya!"}],"from":{"email":"sam.smith@example.com"}}'
```

You send a `POST` request to `https://api.sendgrid.com/v3/mail/send` with a JSON
body that contains the recipient's and sender's email addresses, the subject and
the actual message. The API key that Sendgrid provides and uses to ensure the
request comes from a subscribed user – and which one – is sent as a bearer token

> in the `Authorization` header. That key is also the only reason really why we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the `Authorization` header. That key is also the only real reason why we
```

can't just call the Sendgrid API directly from the browser – if we included the
key in the website's source, we'd be making it publicly available and everyone
could use it to send emails via our Sendgrid account. So we need to keep the
code that calls the Sendgrid API on a server (the edge function we're writing)
and then call that from the browser.

The JavaScript code that handles submission of our contact form (the `<form>`'s
`submit` event) in the browser looks roughly like this:

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```js
```

fetch("https://contact.mainmatter.dev/send", {
  body: JSON.stringify(formData),
  headers: {
    "Content-Type": "application/json; charset=UTF-8'",
  },
  method: "POST",
})
```

We're making a POST request to our edge function with the data the user put in
the contact form's fields sent as JSON in the request body. So in essence, the
edge function acts as a proxy – it translates requests that users' browsers make
to the edge function into requests from the edge function to the Sendgrid API.

## Cloudflare Workers

> As mentioned above, there's quite a few providers to pick from when you want to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, there are quite a few providers to pick from when you want to
```

that we get from the worker context (see the
[Cloudflare docs](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/platform/environment-variables/)
for information on how to set up secrets for workers).

The function constructs the request body to send to Sendgrid (setting a default
message body if it's empty as Sendgrid doesn't allow empty messages) as a JSON
string using the
[`serde_json` crate's `json!` macro](https://docs.rs/serde_json/1.0.89/serde_json/macro.json.html).
It then sends the request to the Sendgrid API (we use the
[`reqwest` crate](https://crates.io/crates/reqwest) here but there are other
options as well) and if that succeeds with status code 202 (indicating the
message was sent), returns an `ok` response.

**And that's already all there is to it!** Of course, there are some details
left out in this example like
[CORS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-origin_resource_sharing) and logging.
Refer to the
[GitHub repository](https://github.com/mainmatter/mainmatter-website-mailer) for
the complete code but it's not really much more than the above.

## Testing

Having written the above code, of course we'd like to test it as well to ensure

> it indeed works correctly and avoid future regressions. Since we're compiling

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it indeed works correctly and to avoid future regressions. Since we're compiling
```

> this to WASM, we cannot simply use Rust's standard `[test]` attribute though but
> need to use the [`wasm-bindgen` crate](https://crates.io/crates/wasm-bindgen):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
this to WASM, we cannot simply use Rust's standard `[test]` attribute; instead, we 
need to use the [`wasm-bindgen` crate](https://crates.io/crates/wasm-bindgen):
```
?

    });

    let result = sendgrid(api_key, data.to_string()).await;

    match result {
        Ok(status) => match status {
            202 => Response::ok(""),
            _ => Response::error("Bad Gateway", 502),
        },
        Err(_) => Response::error("Internal Server Error", 500),
    }
}

pub struct NetworkError;

async fn request_sendgrid(api_key: &str, data: String) -> Result<u16, NetworkError> {
    let client = Client::new();
    let result = client
        .post("https://api.sendgrid.com/v3/mail/send")
        .header("Authorization", format!("Bearer {}", api_key))
        .header("Content-Type", "application/json")
        .body(data)
        .send()
        .await;

    match result {
        Ok(response) => Ok(response.status().as_u16()),
        Err(_) => Err(NetworkError),
    }
}
```

Here we extracted a function `request_sendgrid` that encapsulates the code that
calls the Sendgrid API and that we don't want to run during tests. The
`send_message` function's signature has been changed so that it accepts a
function argument it will call to make the request. The worker's request handler
in the router simply passes in the `request_sendgrid` function to

> `send_message`. So overall, nothing has changed really and everything works

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`send_message`. So overall, nothing has really changed and everything works
```

exactly as it did before. But in the tests, we can now pass in our own function

> that will not actually request the Sendgrid API and return a response right

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that will not actually request the Sendgrid API, but rather returns a response right
```
I'm not sure if I understood the meaning of this sentence, does the Sendgrid API always send a response right away? Or does the function you are passing in return a response right away?
